Many know that the arrival of the Spanish to the Americas caused the fall of indigenous civilizations. Additionally, many have heard the story of Hernán Cortés, the leader of the Spanish expedition that defeated the capital city of the Aztecs, Tenochtitlán. But, an integral part of this history is often forgotten; How did the Spanish communicate with the indigenous people? In the case of Cortés, the answer is simple: Malinche.
La Malinche, also known as Malintzi and Doña Marina, was the interpreter and lover of the Spanish chief Hernán Cortés. Without the help of this intelligent and resourceful woman, Cortés may never have conquered the Aztecs. However, Malinche is a very controversial historical figure. There is much debate about whether we should celebrate her or ridicule her. In fact, today, the word “malinchismo” is used, which means “the rejection of one's own in pursuit of what is foreign” (Luis Beltrán). This word comes from the story of Malinche and the interpretation that she was a traitor. But, contrary to the meaning of “malinchismo,” Malinche was not a traitor because she was not of Aztec origin, she had no obligation to the indigenous people and she only did what was necessary to survive.
Between 1502 and 1505 in southeastern Mexico, Malinche was born in the region of Coatzacoalcos (Escobedo). Because her parents were the chiefs of Painala, she received a good education when she was very young (Matos Moctezuma). But, after her father died, Malinche's mother married and had another son. To ensure that her son would receive the family inheritance, she gave Malinche as a slave when she was between 8 and 12 years old (Escobedo). During her time as a slave, she was eventually sold to the Chontal Mayans of Tabasco (Luis Beltrán). So when Cortés and the Spanish arrived, the Mayans of Tabasco gave them gold, food, and twenty enslaved women as a sign of peace. Among those women was Malinche (Luis Beltrán). Soon, Cortés recognized her intelligence and her ability to speak many languages ​​due to her experience in slavery. For this reason, Cortés used her to communicate with the indigenous people and to conquer the Aztec civilization.
Yes, Malinche helped with the Spanish conquest of Tenochtitlán and the Aztecs, but she was not Aztec. Therefore, it is not possible to consider her as a traitor to the Aztecs. As mentioned above, she was born into a family that was not Aztec. Additionally, during her time as a slave, she worked for indigenous people who saw the Aztecs as their enemies. At that time, the Aztecs of Tenochtitlán were expanding their empire by threatening and attacking other peoples in Mexico (Luis Beltrán). In fact, a large part of the success of the Spanish conquest was the help of many indigenous people. Cortés quickly realized the hatred of the Aztecs that many indigenous people had, and he used that hatred to convince them to help with the conquest of the Aztecs (Matos Moctezuma). Thus, as many indigenous people did, Malinche helped the Spanish. But, because she was not born an Aztec and worked as a slave for enemies of the Aztecs, Malinche never betrayed anyone.
In addition, it is not possible to consider her as a traitor to the indigenous race because Malinche had no obligation to them. She was a slave to the indigenous people. At that time and in indigenous culture, the presence of slaves in society was very common. However, slaves were at the bottom of the hierarchy of society according to the rules of social construction. Thus, slaves had no rights and were mistreated, and Malinche was no exception. Like all slaves, she had masters who could command her to do anything they wanted. In addition, Malinche was very intelligent and spoke several languages ​​such as Nahuatl, Yucatec Mayan, Chontal Mayan and possibly Totonac (La Malinche Was Not A Traitor). Due to her intelligence, she was generally respected and had good status with the Emperor of Tabasco. However, the indigenous people still mistreated her. According to historians, it is very likely that her experience as a slave was a violent situation and that Malinche was used sexually (Escobedo). Furthermore, when the Spanish arrived, the indigenous people gave her to the Spanish like she was an object. Meanwhile, Cortés recognized her intelligence and the Spanish treated her with respect. In fact, the Spanish baptized Malinche and gave her the noble name “Doña Marina” (Matos Moctezuma). Therefore, it is not a surprise that Malinche aligned herself with the Spanish, who respected her, rather than with the indigenous people, who gave her away as an object and treated her so badly. In all, she had the same relationship with the indigenous people as with the Spanish – their slave. Therefore, she had no more obligation to the indigenous people than the Spanish, and she was not a traitor to the indigenous race.
Ultimately, Malinche did what was necessary to survive. All her life, Malinche was a slave. She always had different masters and it was necessary for her to obey them. It was no different with Cortés and the Spanish; She needed to obey them or the Spanish were going to kill her. Under such difficult circumstances, Malinche did what she had to do to survive. She was not a traitor; she was a survivor. Furthermore, she not only survived, but started in a powerless position as a slave and fought to a noble and respectable position. In the context of her circumstances, what Malinche did during her life is impressive and also justified because she was just trying to survive.
Even with the fall of the Aztec civilization, Malinche contributed much to Mexican history. Without her interpretation skills, the Spanish would not have had the option to negotiate with the indigenous people. According to Alina Escobedo, “without her, the triumph of the Spanish would perhaps have taken longer and would have been bloodier.” Without Malinche, the history of the conquest would have been very different from what we know. In addition, she contributed to Mexican history in another way; In 1523, Malinche and Hernán Cortés had a son. This son, Martín Cortés, was the first mestizo person (Matos Moctezuma). That moment marks a very special moment in Mexican history: the beginning of the mestizo race. Now, the majority of the population in Mexico is mestizo. So, instead of criticizing and shaming Malinche, we should appreciate her contributions to the world today.
Malinche's life was very difficult and complicated. She started out as the daughter of the Painala chiefs. Then, after her father's death, she was sold into slavery by her own mother. Much of her life, despite her impressive intelligence, she worked as a slave for the indigenous people, who mistreated her. Eventually, she was gifted to the Spanish like an object and helped them with the conquest of the Aztec people. Finally, she had a son with Cortés, and died in 1529 as a rich and free woman (Escobedo). Still, with this incomprehensible life, many people say that she was a traitor. Still, the word “malinchismo” is used to mean “traitor.” And yet, there is little celebration of this very intelligent and important woman, just because she is a controversial figure. But, at the end of the day, contrary to what many people think, because she was not Aztec, she was not treated well by the indigenous people, she was doing what was necessary to survive and she contributed a lot to Mexican history, Malinche was not a traitor.
